------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer #1 (Remarks for the Author):

There are very interesting and potentially quite influential ideas in
this paper, but too many of them at once are breathlessly muddled up
together in a fog of words, without sufficiently careful description
and logical analysis. The paper does not convey a clear, thorough,
reproducible piece of science to the reader. It lacks focus,
discipline, and rigor. The authors need to choose one story they want
to tell, then tell it completely and thoroughly.

The paper opens with some grand statements about a research program to
develop "paleogenetic" algorithms to reconstruct the RNA world. I
think the authors are using this story to dress up what they're doing,
rather than really taking this research program seriously and
analyzing it logically. For starters, in order to phylogenetically
reconstruct a "primordial ribozyme" such as the "all-RNA primordial
ribosome" from the "RNA world" from extant sequences, the authors need
to be able to argue that the last common ancestor of rRNAs lived in
the RNA world, not the modern DNA/RNA/protein world. It seems clear,
however, that the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all known
extant life had a reasonably complicated and more or less standard
DNA/RNA/protein biochemistry, because (even taking abundant lateral
transfer into account) of how many proteins and biochemical pathways
can be traced back to LUCA. A serious attempt to reconstruct any
aspect of the RNA world by phylogenetic analysis must deal with the
probability that LUCA is almost certainly a bottleneck that occurs
after the RNA world had passed (if the RNA world existed at all). This
is not to say that ancestral reconstruction of structural RNAs isn't
interesting, even if they reconstruct RNAs that lived in less fabulous
creatures than ribosaurs -- it's only to say that the authors' stated
goals seem under-analyzed and over-grandiose, and therefore are
offputting to the reader. Much of the introduction's verbiage about
the RNA world could be deleted, and the aims of the paper could be
focused more realistically, concisely, and clearly.

At the same time, the introduction lacks a clear problem definition
statement. What is the input; what is the desired output; what is the
main idea behind the approach for transforming input to output?
Throughout the paper, terms and programs are thrown around in a
muddled soup, as if everything is a general purpose magic inference
tool. _xrate_ estimates substitution rate parameters (p.2) and folds
RNA (p.5); _evoldoer_ generates pair SCFGs (p.3) and "implements"
TKFST (p.5), whatever "implements" may mean (any given probabilistic
model may be used for a wide range of different simulations or
inference problems). Do they slice and dice tomatoes too? At far too
many points, the authors recite lists of possible applications that
might be tackled someday, or lists of other approaches that can be
viewed as special cases of their approach -- without ever particularly
clearly defining what their approach is. I'm all in favor of
generalizable approaches and powerful probabilistic models, but I want
to see at least one specific, well-described problem solved before one
expounds on all the other things that might possibly be done. That's
what the Discussion is for.

The authors could do a much better job of recognizing that ancestral
sequence reconstruction has been done for decades: both parsimony
methods and maximum likelihood methods for phylogenetic inference
explicitly infer sequences at ancestral nodes in a tree. What's of
interest here is whether that can be done not only for residue
substitution events, but for insertion/deletion events as well, and
whether the inferences are sufficiently accurate that we can take them
seriously and actually synthesize the inferred ancestor(s) and believe
that they tell us something about the structure and function of
extinct biomolecules.

The Methods are unnecessarily opaque and confusing, focusing too much
on peripheral terminology and too little on an actual problem at
hand. For example, for all this talk of "transducer theory", it is
never clear how a "transducer" is meaningfully different from any
other conditional probability model used in sequence analysis -- such
as profile HMMs and profile SCFGs, which model a conditional
distribution P(Y | X) via a model built from sequence X, P(Y | X) ~=
P(Y | model) P(model | X) using a point estimate of an appropriate
model derived from X, where X could be either a query
sequence/alignment in a similarity search, or an ancestor on a tree in
a phylogenetic inference problem. Seems to me that the critical thing,
which the authors actually _underemphasize_, is how one makes this
conditional probability model P(Y | X) be dependent on evolutionary
time t, P(Y | X,t), via an underlying continuous-time Markov model of
evolution in terms of rates of individual events including
substitutions, insertions, and deletions. This time-dependent
evolutionary model has essentially nothing to do with (is separable
from) "transducer theory" as far as I understand; "transducer theory"
is just a different set of words for conditional probability models,
with the evolutionary continuous-time Markov model providing the
particular _parameters_ that get plugged into the conditional
probability model. (That is, I believe that I can interchange a
"string transducer" with an HMM and "parse tree transducer" with an
SCFG with no loss of information. If this is true, the exact names of
things aren't important so long as they're clearly defined and
explained for the particular purpose at hand, and one shouldn't be
trying so hard to brand "transducer theory" as new. If I'm wrong, I
would like to see the authors' clear explanation.) As an example of
what I mean by underemphasizing the evolutionary model, consider the
very term "statistical alignment" that the authors use to describe for
their subfield: the heart of the approach is neither statistical (a
"statistic" being an arbitrary measure of something, as opposed to a
probability model) nor really about "alignment" (the problem at hand
is phylogenetic inference, not alignment; alignment is necessary, but
only as a nuisance variable in the inferences that the authors are
actually interested in making) -- not to mention that there is a large
body of other work on probabilistic alignment approaches that the
authors seem to be trying to marginalize by distinguishing only their
particular favorite flavor as "statistical alignment".

I struggled, section by section, to decipher in the Results what the
take home message of the paper -- or even any individual section -- is
supposed to be. Each section of Results has similar problems; I'll do
a fairly detailed analysis of just the first results section, then
I'll be brief with the rest.

Results 2.1 attempts to describe an experiment in which the authors
ask whether it is necessary to use "covariant" rate models, as opposed
to point substitution rate models, to accurately reconstruct ancestral
RNA sequences. There are immediately a number of problems just in the
conception of this experiment, including:

1. How is it relevant? The introduction claimed that "the central
result of this paper is the development ["of a theory for statistical
alignment and reconstruction of RNA"] building on the transducer
framework for protein and DNA reconstruction". But rate matrices for
single residues or even for base pairs are standard models in the
field (incidentally, the authors cited zero prior work on using base
pair rate matrices was cited, but a fair amount exists), and have
nothing really to do with "transducer theory" nor with inference of
indel structure, supposedly the main point of the paper.

2. Why do the experiment at all, when the answer is already known and
trivial? Obviously a point substitution model will not constrain
ancestral base pairs to be valid base pairs; obviously modeling with
base pairing correlations makes for a better model of a structural
RNA. The reason to do a *quantitative* experiment to address a
question whose qualitative answer is trivially obvious would be if the
quantitative error rate was meaningful in some sense that had been set
up in a problem definition statement. This would require deeper
thought and discussion about how accurate an ancestral RNA
reconstruction actually needs to be, for an intended purpose. For
example, one might imagine a cost-benefit analysis of how many
sequences need to be synthesized to find a functional ancestral
sequence for a given error rate, if we're taking this research program
seriously; then there might be a threshold prediction error rate that
one needs to drop below, in order to make synthesis and testing of the
predictions reasonable. But instead, the authors do go ahead and draw
only qualitative conclusions from their results in Fig 1, that
modeling base pairs is better than not modeling base pairs: "we
conclude that deep phylogenetic reconstructions of ribosomes, and
other RNAs, will require covariant substitution models that take
account of RNA secondary structure". But this, anyone working on RNA
already "knew". Wait, the authors might say, maybe we shouldn't trust
our intuition? Fine -- but ironically, in the very next sentence, they
show how willing they are to make essentially the same obvious
qualitative leap, on the most relevant point to the theory they want
to express, without any quantitative analysis: "We may reasonably
deduce that indel reconstructions will similarly need to take account
of RNA structure". This "deduction" does not follow from the residue
substitution results in Figure 1 any more than it already followed
from what we already knew about RNA structure and evolution.

Even beyond the conception and rationale of the experiment shown in
section 2.1, the design and execution of the experiment are
inadequately explained. What base pair rate models did you estimate --
a completely unconstrained 16x16 base pair model? a general-reversible
model? or a model with more constraints? What "75-taxon phylogeny" did
you use (Rfam does not provide phylogenies); with what branch lengths?
When you simulate 5000 "random alignments" of descendant sequences on
this tree, how do you choose the initial ancestral sequence for each
simulated alignment (it must have a base-paired structure for the
experiment to be reasonable; there's many ways you could have done
this, but it's unclear which, if any, were used). Why did you strip
only the ancestral (root) sequence out of the alignment? shouldn't
_all_ internal node sequences be stripped out, if we're trying to
simulate the ability to reconstruct ancestral seqs from extant seqs?

Results 2.2 follows a similar pattern. The authors use bold face to
"emphasize that this [TKFST] is not just a method for simultaneous
alignment and folding of RNA" -- even before they make a concrete
problem definition of what TKFST _is_! A reproducible description of
TKFST isn't given here; it is "reviewed in Section 3.1". No, it isn't
given there either; Section 3.1 meanders in an unclear fashion, still
without problem definition, hitting a variety of topics connected to
TKFST, while saying at various points things like "full details... are
given in the Supplementary Material". So much for this "theory" for
"computational reconstruction of the RNA World" being the "central
result" of the paper! What the heck is it doing lying around in pieces
in the Results, Methods, and Supplementary Material, as opposed to one
clear central exposition?

My comments on the rest of the paper would continue repetitively in
the same vein but since this review is already long, I'll stop. In
summary, I think the authors are working on very interesting issues
that they're explaining atrociously. Writing a clear paper requires
more discipline. The authors need to go back to the drawing board for
this paper, pick one point they want to make, and write a clear,
logical paper that conveys one nice story rigorously.


some small points:

- group II introns are not "76-91 nt" (Table 3 and elsewhere); they
  are much larger than this. The authors must be using the Rfam
  Intron_gpII alignment, which only deals with two of the six
  consensus structural domains (domains V and VI).

- it's a lot more useful to a reviewer to get a manuscript in
  manuscript form (i.e. at least 1.5x linespaced if not doublespaced),
  not a tightly spaced journal format, so there's ample room for
  annotation.

- the fonts in Figures 1 and 2 are too small.




Reviewer #2 (Remarks for the Author):

I. The manuscript describes an method for simultaneously inferring the
alignment and secondary structure of three modern RNA sequences along
with that of the internal node on a 3-taxon tree - a previously
unsolved problem to the extent of my knowledge. The manuscript also
assesses the TKF Structure Tree (TKFST) model of RNA structure
evolution in terms of its ability to help reconstruct ancestral
alignments and structures. Both of these results (new method, model
assessment) are important steps towards the goal of reconstructing the
sequence and structure of ancestral RNA molecules, which is a very
interesting biological question.

This topic is by nature complex and involved, and I am unfortunately
not an expert in RNA structure. Nevertheless, I think that the authors
display a deep and intuitive grasp of this field that is quite
impressive, while being moderately understandable to the outsider. In
most cases, I was able to follow the description of rather complex
procedures on my first pass through the paper even though I was not
previously acquainted with SCFGs in any detail. I think that the
readability for readers that are less familiar with the background can
be improved by adding some background in a few places, which I will
try to indicate below.

II. My major advice on improving the readability of the paper is to
decrease or remove emphasis on the names of programs. In general, an
inference or estimate should be described in terms of (i) the model
used, (ii) the type of estimate (e.g. maximum likelihood estimate,
posterior mean, etc.) and (iii) the algorithms employed. It should not
be described in terms of the name of the program that is run to
perform the inference. For example, in the beginning of section 2.1,
the authors write "We first used xrate to estimate parameters..." when
they should say something like "We used an EM algorithm to compute
maximum likelihood estimates of parameters for the substitution
model. We held the alignment fixed, and summed over the unknown
secondary structure and ancestral sequences."

(I recognize that the authors wish to point out their work in
extending existing programs to provide infrastructure for estimating
ancestral sequences.)

Secondly, I think that the authors downplay the very real value of
their analyses by focusing too heavily on the exact protocol of the
analyses and playing down the questions and results in addition to the
methods. For example, in Section 2.1 they write "We implemented ..." ,
"We first used xrate ..." , "Next we used the companion program
SIMGRAM ...", "We stripped the ancestral sequence..." It would be
helpful if the authors began section 2.1 with a description of the
tests that would be performed in that section, and what questions they
answer, instead of beginning by describing xrate. Similarly, in
section 2.2 the authors make an important point in bold font: "We
emphasize that this is not just a method for simultaneous alignment
and folding of RNA. Our intention here is a critical assessment of the
realism of TKFST as an evolutionary model, not simply an
implementation of the algorithm of Sankoff."  Nevertheless, this
section is titled "Multiple Alignment and RNA folding". Hopefully
these examples clarify my general point about how the authors can
improve readability.


III. Specific suggestions

1. [ Abstract ] I presume that xrate estimates maximum likelihood
parameters estimates using the EM algorithm. I presume that xrate sums
over all structures when estimating parameters? When it is used to
estimate structures, I presume that structure estimates are
conditioned on maximum likelihood rate estimates?

These points should be clarified somewhere, though perhaps not in the
abstract.

2. [Abstract] The abstract is written as if the main topic of interest
is programs, not algorithms and biological questions. However, the
authors underestimate the importance of their work by focusing on
programs.

3. [ pg 2. / Section 2.1 ]

While implementing programs is an important part of biological
research, I think that the authors are downplaying their true
contribution in this section by describing the program names that were
used instead of focusing on the methods and algorithms.

[pg 2 / Section 2.1 ] "We implemented ancestral sequence
reconstruction in xrate, including posterior probabilities that the
reconstructions are correct."

This single sentence should be expanded to at least one or two
paragraphs describing the type of estimation that is being performed
as well as the type of algorithm that implements this estimation. I
presume that (i) xrate estimates parameter values of the substitution
model using maximum likelihood.  (ii) I presume that in the definition
of the likelihood the alignment is held constant, but the secondary
structures and ancestral sequences are summed over (as latent
variables).  (iii) The maximization over parameters is carried out
using an EM approach.

If this is the case, then what kind of estimates of the structure, and
of ancestral sequences, are being performed? I presume that xrate
conditions on the maximum likelihood estimates of substitution
parameter values and then selects the ancestral sequence (or
structure) that has the highest posterior probability? If so, then
these points might be a good starting place for a description of xrate
and the extension that you performed.

4. [ pg 3 / Section 2.2 ] The authors should retitle this section to
indicate that it is primarily about the critical assessment of the
TKFST model, and focus less on the exact protocol. Perhaps the exact
steps could be described in a separate "Methods" section that
describes protocol details. These details must be provided so that the
reader fully understands what the authors are doing, but they are not
usually the main point.

The authors explicitly say "We emphasize that this is not just a
method for simultaneous alignment and folding of RNA. Our intention
here is a critical assessment of the realism of the TKFST as an
evolutionary model." This is a good point - but the title and logical
structure of this section focuses more on the protocol details for
running programs.

5. [pg 3 / "pair SCFG" ] This has not been defined yet. Many readers
will be unfamiliar enough with SCFGs that it is important to define
pair-SCFG's before saying too much about them.

6. [ pg. 3 ] It would be helpful to add one or two more sentences of
explanation about sensitivity and PPV mean, and how they are applied
to alignments and RNA structures.

7. [ pg. 4 ] It is curious that the stemloc native grammar doesn't
seem to cause much improvement in alignment sensitivity and PPV even
though it has an affine gap penalty. Can you say why this is the case?
What is the average gap length - is it near 1?

8. It would be useful to give parameter estimates from PFOLD or the
stemloc-native grammar to indicate what kind of properties these RNA
molecules have, and whether or not a model like TKFST that has fewer
parameters should be expected to do a good job modeling the evolution
of such sequences. For example, if the average gap length is near
zero, then that parameter is not helping the PFOLD model much, but if
it is large, then we should expect the fewer parameters of the TKFST
model to result in worse model fit and inferior prediction quality.

9. [pg. 5 ] "To test this, we tried re-folding the multiple alignments
with xrate..."  This sentence is unclear because it uses the program
name xrate instead of describing the procedure that was carried out,
and because the word "re-folding" is a bit too terse. You might say,
"To test this, we re-estimated rate parameters and secondary structure
using the PFOLD grammar while fixing the multiple sequence alignment
to the value estimated in the previous step." You might then
optionally add that this was accomplished using xrate if you wish to
emphasize which program was used.

10a. [pg. 5] "The structure prediction accuracy of the TKFST and
stemloc-native grammars was much better when combined with xrate, and
both grammars were comparable..."

The authors should not say "when combined with xrate" but should
indicate what they are using xrate to do.

10b. When the authors re-estimate the structure using xrate, they use
a different model (PFOLD) to do so. Why, then, are these new structure
estimates taken to represent "the structure prediction accuracy of the
TKFST and stemloc-native grammars"? Don't they represent the
structure-prediction accuracy of the PFOLD grammar, conditioned on
alignments inferred using the TKFST and stemloc-native grammars?

I don't see a good reason why the PFOLD model should be used during
re-estimation of the secondary structure. If the problem is early
commitment to incorrect second structures during an algorithm like
progressive alignment, then re-estimating the structure with the TKFST
and stemloc-native models (respectively) should eliminate the problem.

The authors have previous noted that "Rational design of ... pipelines
can be facilitated by using a consistent statistical framework." This
would seem to indicate that the same model should be used in all
stages of this pipeline, especially since the authors are seeking to
compare models.

10c. [Table 2] I don't think the last two lines should be
characterized by "+xrate" since xrate is just a software
package. Instead, you should choose a label that indicates what you
are doing.  (I) I am not sure, but it looks like you are using PFOLD?
(II) If so, then perhaps the last two rows should be written as
"+PFOLD?"

10d. [pg. 5] "We parametrized the singlet and branch transducers of
the TKFST model using estimates reported by PFOLD, a phylo-grammar for
RNA secondary structure prediction, and evoldoer, an implementation of
the Structure Tree model for two sequences."

(i) How can you obtain estimates for the parameters in the TKFST model
by using a different model - the PFOLD model?  (ii) This sentance
again describes the names of program used instead of the methods and
algorithms by which the estimates were constructed.  (iii) I would
suggest rephrasing the last phrase "an implementation of the Structure
Tree model for two sequences". This is because technically you don't
implement models, you implement inference algorithms that use
models. So, here, evoldoer implements inference of the pairwise
alignment between two sequences under the TKFST model (I think). If
one algorithm (DP) implements the hard part of a wide variety of
inference methods then you could say so, I suppose.

13. "Pair-SCFG" Can the authors describe a pair-SCFG in more detail?
Although the manuscript compares the pair-SCFG to a pair-HMM, the
authors should still point out (for example) that a pair-SCFG is an
SCFG that emits pairs of letters, not a pair of SCFGs. It might also
be worth explicitly pointing out that the transformation rule "S1 → x
S2" in the SCFG corresponds to (in a pair-HMM) (I)state S1 emits
letter "x" (II)state S1 then transitions to state S2.  These two
things are probably worth pointing out, given that they do not add
much length to the paper.

14. [pg. 8] Define "X-terminals" and "Y-terminals." This is important
terminology that is re-used, and it would be worth making sure the
reader understands it here in order to clarify what follows. Also, you
might clarify that X here represents the ancestor and Y the descendent
along a branch of the tree, since this isn't always the case (I
think).

15. [pg. 10 ] "In practice, we find the size of the state space is
approximately linear in the number of branches..."  Can you say
whether you find this to be true for several different grammars, or
just for (e.g.) the TKFST grammar? It would seem that the number of
states should grow exponentially in the number of wait states for each
branch transducer, or faster. However, because the TKFST model does
not have affine gap penalties, it may have only one wait state,
leading to the linear growth that you observed. Regardless of whether
this guess is correct or incorrect, a comment about how affine gap
penalties affect the number of states would be helpful here.

If this is the case, then could you say something like "In the case of
the TKFST model" instead of "In practice..."? Also, can you clarify
"realistic biological models never reach this bound"? What aspect of
realistic models prevents the bound from being reached?

16. [pg. 11] "... is sufficient for a likelihood-sampling algorithm
over a tree".  The phrase "likelihood-sampling" is vague - technically
the likelihood itself isn't being sampled. You could say something
like "is sufficient for a calculating the likelihood of a full tree,
which would be used in likelihood-based algorithms for sampling branch
lengths, substitution rates, and other model parameters". Or perhaps
you mean, sufficient for sampling the alignment and the RNA structure
at all nodes?  [pg. 11] "Evaluation of the likelihood function of a
node conditioned on its neighborhood..."  Can you rewrite this for
accuracy and clarity?  (I) "... the likelihood function of a node ..."
- this is vague, and focuses more on commonly used algorithms than on
what exactly those algorithms calculate.  (II) "... conditioned on its
neighborhood..." - technically, you are not statistically conditioning
on the sequence at every node in the neighborhood, but just on
(perhaps) the sequence at the ancestor node. The sequences at the
other nodes are given, but you are acutally computing the probability
of the sequences at these nodes, not conditioning on them.

[pg 6., Fig 3] "Maximum likelihood reconstruction of ancestral
structures" When you say "ancestral structures", do you mean the
structure at the internal node on an unrooted 3-taxon tree? This is
not the ancestor of the three leaf sequences, but the common ancestor
of two of the sequences, using the third as an
outgroup. Reconstructing the ancestor of all three would require
knowing where the root of the tree was, if I understand correctly.

In summary, I hope that these suggestions are useful to the authors in
improving readability of the paper. The only point that may be a real
error is point 10a,b,c,d. Overall the manuscript was well-written and
makes important contributions to the field of RNA structure
reconstruction.

-Benjamin Redelings
